stuck to that that in effect we organize our
lecture and our instruction ecologically rather
than many other places have done. we can, and
deliberately so, but it is in Seattle especially
easy because the departments of zoology and of
botany have strong marine programs or have
faculty with strong marine interests so that we
don't have to teach our students algology for
oceanographers or invertebrates for
oceanographers. So we send them to the basic
sciences and let them pick it up there and we can
afford them to talk about the ocean as inhabited
for marine organisms talk about benthos or
plankton I began to lecture on the upper division
level about general biological oceanography
along the lines I had indicated earlier along the
lines of my training although the first time
around or the first one and a half times around I
think it was still three quarters or so biology of
marine organisms but Since then, it was
biological oceanography proper, with strong
emphasis on production biology, very little on
zoogeography, or biogeography, which I consider
to be another legitimate part of biological
oceanography, but I didn't know much about it, so
it was primarily production biology. And I
lectured to biologists and non-biologists, that
is, biological oceanographers and
non-biological oceanographers, who in those
years all were sitting through the same courses.
And these upper division lectures were
prescribed in our undergraduate curriculum, but
all graduate students who came from the outside
had to take them, too. So it was a very mixed
audience. The biologists in those years often
accused me of that I really did not address them,
but I was addressing the other ones, the
non-biologists, because I treated life in the
ocean, which they had come to study, I treated life
in the ocean strictly in terms of carbon or
chlorophyll and so on, which is very easy then for
physical and say chemical oceanographers to
understand, but not very not firing up the
imagination of the biologists but this emphasis
was not really to please the non-biologists or to
make it easy for them but it was really my way of
outlook that I thought that in terms of
chlorophyll you can compare the North Pacific
with the North Atlantic or the North Pacific in the
temperate North Pacific with the tropical North
Pacific. Whereas if you had species lists, well,
you couldn't really. So it was designed. But many
bollushes were very unhappy and still are. But
that is just my way of looking at the world. At that
time, I thought already of writing it up, writing a
textbook. The lecture notes, at least, were
organized such that they were proper referencing
where did I get this idea from and where did that
slide come from, because there was no book which
treated the ocean. There was no book on biological
oceanography. The oceans were way outdated
already then. I think they were outdated when they
were written, as far as biology is concerned.
Otherwise, a very good book, but in biology, quite
so so. Well, I will come back to that book later. I
didn't get to it yet.
I did draw early on the results of model studies, of
theoretical studies in biological
oceanography, which also was done rarely in those
years. But because I was not trained
mathematically enough, I could not really teach
by means of models, which would be the most elegant
way. Nobody did it in those years except Reilly
himself. But at least I used the results and said,
look, students, that is the future. And again,
until very recently, until Parsons' textbook
came about, there was no text on which you could
draw.
As far as research is concerned, I emphasize
plankton methods. I continue to be interested in
methods, and especially of the assessment of
phytoplankton standing stock. That is the
inheritance from cry. I was a little disenchanted
with the chemical method, but I also did not want to
have phytoplankton theses and phytoplankton
written which just had long species lists. So in
the first years, very much on my mind was the
problem of how to convert from species lists into
mass estimates. And the theses by Lawrence, for
example, and by Hobson, the master theses by both,
and also by Strathman were very much concerned
with those issues. In a way, I did not continue with
zooplankton work, and the reason is that in 1961,
there was a symposium held in Copenhagen on
zooplankton, which was to be the successor to that
mentioned 1957 symposium on primal production.
The zooplankton symposium was not nearly as good
as the phytoplankton symposium, but that's
besides the point. I was invited, no, I think I
contributed a paper on the role of the small
zooplankton, which nobody on this continent at
that time talked about, which is again bringing
up, reminding the people of the Lohmann idea. I
just reviewed literature and said, now look,
there are many, many organisms which slip through
the meshes you use. and I was invited to give a
review on the vertical distribution of
soroplankton, which I did, but that was not well
done in my opinion, so I rewrote it and re-expanded
it and finished that in 1963 and that was published
in 1964. And in that review, of course I reviewed
among other things the vertical migration issue,
pointing out that very often organisms don't
migrate, which I had mentioned before. But I also
elaborated on, or I touched upon, the problem of
the vertical distribution of very small
zooplankton, say CLJs and nauplii, in the mixed
layer. and When I finished that review, I thought
the only really interesting aspect in
zooplankton work, besides biogeography, which
is a different issue, but otherwise the only
really important issue before us is this question
of the zooplankton as a mixed layer, which ties
into production studies, and I can't go into this.
The upshot as far as my own scientific future is
concerned was that I realized that I couldn't do it
myself. First, it involved revisiting of
populations, which is objectively difficult to
come back to the same population in the open sea. It
can't be done even now. But the other issue is of the
statistical problems. to which I can't go into
either, but at any rate I realized that I didn't
have the equipment, training-wise, nor the
logistics behind me, and so I just left it at that,
and it is only beginning to be picked up now. Well,
people begin to think about along these lines now.
But I was so discouraged that I just left
zooplankton work, distribution work, and have
never done it ever since, although, of course, I
still lecture about it.
the, what shall I say, I was to say major
accomplishment, but that is a little too much.
What I had to do here is teach oceanography, of
course, and get biological oceanography and get
the research going. And what I realized very early
was that the teaching of biological
oceanography, whatever there was, was directed
at the open ocean entirely, that biological
oceanography or the interaction of life with the
sea was treated as if there was no bottom but of
course it is obvious and was obvious then that much
of the research amid much of the interaction
between man and the sea and much of the research our
students would have to do would be concerned with
the ocean on the shelf and on the shelf of course you
can't neglect the seabed So I began to introduce
benthic teaching, teaching on the benthos, and
also to bring in, to build up a research effort. The
research effort was in part In expansion of the
Plumpton work, I wanted to try to apply chemical
methods, quick methods, to an assessment of the
overall activity of the community and the overall
concentration. And out of this attempt came
Pramatma's work, who is one of my best students, I
think. Very much independent, but still my
student. He introduced the determination of
oxygen consumption by the seabed. It had been
invented by somebody else, but he really made a
golden proposition out of it. We realized, of
course, that we could not, this is early 1960s now,
we realized that we would have to work on the
organisms too, and so I looked around for money to
take up classical benthic quantitative work and
invited, advertised for it, and we invited a
Norwegian, Mr. Lee, to come here. And Lee then
very, who was originally a plantologist but
learned the literature very, very quickly and
again was very independent, but in effect he
started our Benthic work here and then very
quickly got ahead of many other concurrent
workers by introducing methods in plant
sociology into well-developed mathematical
methods into the marine domain, and therefore
advanced the field very much beyond what was done
by the Danish school, which dominated the east
coast of this country until ten years later
almost. Lee, if I remember correctly, came in late
1962.
For Lee, I identified the polychaetes. I sort of, I
agreed to identify the polychaetes because, of
course, that's always an issue now if you take
these many samples, who is going to identify,
recognize the species, and then count them before
you can start thinking about them. And Lee took the
Causatians and a colleague of... a professional,
Mr. Kiska, took the bivalves and the cannadomes,
and there were a few others helping in the minor
groups. I said, well, sure, I take the polykids
because I knew them. I also had looked at a few
samples here, and uninhabited, in sand, where
usually you find new species. If you want to find
new species, that was the lesson learned in Kiel by
Remane, look at clean sand and you will find just
one species after another. And so I had done here
just to find out how well known is this region,
using the clean sand as sort of the yardstick. If
many species were unknown, then who knows what
kind of surprises would wait on Markbottom, say. I
took a few samples, two I believe, and there was
only one new species and so I was quite relaxed and
certainly sure I can identify for using
polychaetes, of course through research
assistance students. It turned out that was a
great mistake. The polychaete fauna wasn't well
known and in the years since then, since 1962 or 3,
we have added all
The polycate found 170% of what it was when we
started out. And in effect, I have been trapped
since then in identifying polycates. Not
identifying, but describing polycates, making
revisions, and writing keys. together with one of
my students. And I'm just now in the process of
winding that up. I hope in another year I will
finish this second volume to the polykids of
British Columbia and Washington. That's a
natural unit. And then get rid of it because
the initial excitement has worn off, which always
it does. But more importantly, In an oceanography
department, this is a little out of place. Of
course, biological oceanographers have to know
organisms. Otherwise, if they don't tack on the
name or pin on the name to the organisms, they can't
use the literature because the name only opens to
the literature. But to spend much time on working
on the taxonomy, that is really what the ologists
are being paid for. And the disadvantage then is
that I do the logical work here, which is fine,
nobody is against it, but I can't train students in
it. Because if I say, where to train poly-kid
students in oceanography, they still would have
to take all the physical courses and all the
chemical oceanography and what have you, and in
consequence wouldn't have enough knowledge of
entomology and of physiology and what have you.
And so they would not be really competitive. Which
jobs would they take? They would not be full
zoologists, but they wouldn't be full
oceanographers either. I think it's not good for
my role as a teacher to continue to work on the
polygates, even if I enjoyed it, which I don't
anymore, because keys are just tools, very
important tools, but you never get them in a
textbook, you never become famous, because you
just sharpen tools for the others. And so when I'm
through these keys, I will not regret it. As I said,
very important, but I don't say anything about the
ocean. So that was really a trap into which I got
half of my papers now on polychaetes, not about the
ocean or plankton methods at all.
Now, to finish this treatment of what we did in the
Bentos, we added, of course, a Bentos faculty, but
on a faculty, teaching faculty, so that I didn't
have to lecture about it. But again, we had
somebody who didn't stick to it, who didn't
publish. That happens, of course. And because of
the funding problems for and for Lee, who were on
soft money, We just couldn't keep them here
because they were receiving offers all the time
and said, well, if you people can't give me a
tenured position, well, I will just leave. And so
they did. And after Parmakmat left, who was the
last one, in 72 or 73, the whole Bento's effort was
really for naught. We had been on the map for a
while, but that was it. People still write here and
want to study Bentos, but of course that is for
reasons of publications done ten years ago. And if
now somebody speaks about theater, work on
Bentos, he usually means, or she usually means
Paine's work in the zoology department, which
has, or who, Paine rather, who since the mid-60s
has really developed new ideas which have
fertilized, so to speak, ecology in general, not
just marine work, but ecology in general. And that
is why one ought to come here to study Inventor's
work. Although I must make him a qualifier, now we
have hired somebody new a year ago, Peter, or two
years ago, Peter Jumas, who is this young
generation, first of all, he's very good, but also
this young generation where the training is so
much better that all the time I'm just embarrassed
in talking to him, which happens to all older
people, I suppose, that the younger generation is
better trained, and the only... handicap they
have is that they don't have enough experience
that I know just by experience what the answer is
whereas they have to derive it and it takes them
half a minute for the derivation but once they have
the experience of course we are the old people are
just old well So my work in Bentos, in a way, has not
been too successful because of these
institutional restraints or accidents, if you
want to put it this way, that you hire somebody and
he doesn't pan out.
That was through the 60s. During the mid-60s, I
began to become interested in national ocean
politics. I was, from 1964 to 1970, the biologist
on NASCO, the Academy Committee on Oceanography,
about which I don't have to tell you anything, I
suppose. I was the successor of Dixie Lee Ray, who
now is our governor. And I also participated in
those years on other committees, on national
levels, visiting committees and advisory boards
and what have you, and also was active in
university self-governance here.
It was only a sort of temporary love affair. After a
few years, during which I learned very, very much.
These were very interesting years. After a few
years, I began to become disenchanted, perhaps
through my own development, further
development, but also because NASCO, was not
longer a very effective speaker in the late 60s on
the national stage. There were so many others now
speaking for oceanography, and, of course, owing
to the war, the general national scene was
slightly confused, to put it mildly. So it wasn't
very interesting anymore, and Nazgul only had to
speak, address politics, question, kill brush
fires here and there. There was no science
anymore. So when they were dissolved under
Calhoun's leadership, Calhoun saw to it that it
was restructured, and I was glad to be rotated off.
And I guess it had to do with my development, too.
Since those years, I have sort of withdrawn. I've
withdrawn a little too strong, but I'm not so long
as interested in working on this committee and
that university panel. which in part is my own
development, but many other colleagues after the
Vietnam experience, on this campus at least, have
withdrawn and are not longer so active helping to
run the university, but just leave it to the
president or administrators to the dean. So in a
way, I'm a child of my age, of course, and that I
have, in other words, I have returned to research
and teaching. I certainly am not interested in
administration as a profession, although I see
the virtue and the challenge to it. But right now,
I'm still an active scientist. And of course, 10
years later, who knows? But during the 60s, I had
the choice several times to become largely the
administrator. And I said, no. And still, 10 years
later, I don't regret it. But as I said, another 10
years, who knows? So what is really left now is to
say what kind of research I have done in the 70s.
Part of the research, half of the papers is
polykids, as I mentioned, and I hope to wind it up
soon.
I do have the textbook still on my mind, and I will
come back to this later.
There was the... Let me say that I mentioned that
symposium on primary productivity in 1957, which
was the first summary of what was going on, but
which also was a milestone and led us on for a few
very active years in primary productivity
research, which was all done by chemical methods.
Carbon-14, in a way, is a chemical method.
chlorophyll is a chemical method, nobody looked
through the microscope anymore, but by 1965 or so
the cream was off, sort of, and many people,
including me, thought that the demise is inside
and so get off and do something better, and I got
into the force by the circumstances, got into the
bentos, more or less.
And for others it appeared clear, and I agreed at
that time, that secondary production, animal
production, would now be the most important
theme, which would, of course, bring us back to
zooplankton, but it was not so much so plant and
distribution, but it was clear that we would have
to do very much work in the lab on grazing rates, on
growth rates, and so on and so forth, which several
people then did, but I didn't join because it
didn't interest me so much. But that was in the
mid-60s what seemed to be the important part, and I
tried to push it on the national level, too, and
secondary product on the bottom. get away from
just counting animals but say now what do they do,
how fast do they grow, what do they do to each other.
What do they do to each other is what pain is doing
and I try to push now how fast is it being done. And
what does a mud bottom do to the overlying sea water
in contrast to a sand bottom? What's the
difference between sand and mud bottom when you
view it from above, from the water? Is there any
difference? So these kinds of issues of secondary
production I thought would be interesting, but I
largely talked about it without doing very much.
It turned out then that the assessment of the
primary production of that demise was not quite
right. Primarily under Dugdale's leadership,
the field has been reopened and is now really
moving again. We realized, and Dugdale has done
that before he came here, but he was, Dugdale was
here for quite a while, and you ought to talk to
Dugdale, really, history of oceanography in
Maine. You might want to note that down. Duckdale
put modern plant physiology together with what we
have done so before. What he tried to do, and still
is, to predict plant growth from, that is, a rate,
from the nutrient concentrations, which we had
looked at in a far too simple-minded way before.
And it turned out that this involves a lot of lab
work, which is still going on, but also very much
more sophisticated sampling at sea. So that he
built up here, and I'm sorry, he also pointed out
and did do something about it, that more
mathematical modeling is needed, which he didn't
invent, but he tried to build up a group where
everything was done at the same time. So there was a
lot of interaction about it. But I guess because of
different temperaments, I think that's the
principal reason, but also because of the way we
are spread through different buildings. We
really never cooperated. This building did its
thing, and Duckdale and the other building did his
thing, and they had different coffee pots, met
every day, and when the interests diverged, went
on different expeditions, so we developed really
in a different manner. so much that when people
here on this floor looked for mathematicians and
hired a very good mathematician, Winter, to work
on productivity data, local productivity data in
Puget Sound, whereas Duckville never looked at
local water. They always had thought of
subtropical regions for good reasons. So when we
hired this new man, even our modeling approach was
different from theirs. So there were really two
modeling groups in Seattle, which must have
looked very strange to the outside. But that is the
way it went. Different traditions within the same
place, which is a function of size and script that
happens, too, that people don't know what Miller
does in the other one. Because they never eat with
each other. One has his lunch group, the other one
this one. So in a way, we were a... victim of size. At
any rate, by introducing Winter into the field, he
taught in the first year primarily to me, I learned
a great deal about modeling and what good it can do,
which reinforced my youth really, but I also came
back to primary production in a way. and also
realized that what was missing in oceanography to
really make the big next step after the
introduction of the carbon-14 method was, yes,
all right, more secondary production, but more
importantly, to have more theory. Not to have more
expedition, more data, and El Said in Texas A&M is
the one who says we need more data and continues to
go to the Antarctic Ocean, which I very much admire
because it's an awful place to go. But I think, in my
opinion, that is an opinion, we need more theory.
into which to fit new data. There are enough data
laying around to construct theory and then try to
test the theory or discard or substantiate it,
rather than to continue to take observations at
sea. That is what I learned from Winter, among
other things. So in a way, then, we are again
back to primary production, in a way, but we don't
do it very actively. Winter was hired in 1970, and
the big paper came out in 74, the big paper on Puget
Sound. And in the meantime, we have another paper
in press. But this development was interrupted by
a sabbatical, which I spent at Scripps in, yeah,
now I don't know, 71 to 72, I guess so. Or 72 to 73, I
don't recall. At any rate, I went there not only to
have the sabbatical, but to write the textbook.
But because I didn't know how to spend a
sabbatical, I didn't manage quite. The mistake I
made was that I had an obligation here to finish an
article with a co-author, and there was another
manuscript which was almost ready and had been
sitting on my desk for a year, and when I came to
Scripps and for the first time had time to think
about it leisurely without all the time somebody
coming in or hurrying away to lectures, I saw how
bad it was. There was a month gone for this and for
that. So I really wrote only for two or three
months. Now I know how to write it, and I also know
that I have to restrict my scope considerably.
Originally, I wanted to write a textbook for
biological oceanography. All of it. And there is
no book yet which does it. Although there are a few
multi-author books, it is still not a book you can
use in class.